“Through faith they defeated kingdoms,
“brought about righteousness,
“obtained promises,
“stopped the mouths of lions,
“quenched the force of fire,
“escaped the edge of the sword,
“from a weak state were made powerful,
“became mighty in war,
routed invading armies.”
Faith in Jehovah has allowed ordinary people
to do extraordinary things.
This kind of faith is still active today
and still has the power to help us
through any difficulty.
So let’s travel across the globe
and see how deep reliance on Jehovah
has helped many overcome their unique trials.
As we visit each land,
we’ll enjoy a story of faith
shared both from the perspective
of close friends
as well as the individuals involved.
Now to our first destination.
South Africa is full of contrasts
and diversity.
Big, modern cities mix
with poorer remote areas.
For many volunteers
in Kingdom Hall construction,
this presents wonderful opportunities
but also unique challenges that require faith
in Jehovah.
An example of that
is our young friend Namhla.
My wife and I really appreciated
the faith she showed
to make herself available
and to keep her joy in her assignment.
I’m the only Jehovah’s Witness in my family.
What my mother desired the most for me
was to grow up,
go to college
and, in time, get a high-paying job.
My congregation was busy
building a Kingdom Hall,
so I would sometimes also go to help.
I wanted to see and feel the joy
that those brothers were having
building Kingdom Halls.
My mom didn’t like it when she heard
that I was going to help
with Kingdom Hall construction.
She felt that I was wasting my time.
When I arrived on-site,
everything I did was for the first time.
I didn’t have skills,
and I had never done this work before.
It is not easy.
Sometimes I get tired
—mentally exhausted
and even physically exhausted.
Sometimes it’s difficult
to even read the Bible.
I just want to wash up and go to sleep.
It was important for Namhla
to find her spiritual balance
because her spirituality
was more important
than working hard on-site.
I realized that I needed
to be really determined
because my spirituality
was not the same as before.
I saw that I needed to make a change.
I made it a priority to read the Bible first
and to think about the things I read.
I also made sure that I was regular
in going out in the ministry.
Prayer helped a lot
because prayer is the best way
for me to tell Jehovah
things that concern me.
I have seen for myself
how Jehovah God has sustained me.
We’ve seen that she is much more balanced.
My mom would phone and ask,
“Namhla, how is the project going?”
And then she would say,
“If this makes you happy,
then I am also happy.”
At first, I had my fears,
but faith made me confident
that Jehovah God would always be there
to support me in everything I do.
Canada is a diverse country
—both the landscape
and, because of immigration,
the people and their languages.
In order to share Bible truth
with these ones,
many brothers are learning a new language,
like my friend Shaquille.
When Shaquille got invited to Bethel,
I had the privilege of serving
at the Canada branch at the time.
So it was such a pleasure
to see this young man
who had all these wonderful goals
and to see one by one
Jehovah opening those doors to him.
He had made a promise to Jehovah
as a young person.
I want to help those
that don’t have anyone to help them.
Jehovah saw good in me,
and he invested in me,
and he was very patient with me,
and I saw it through every brother and sister
who sincerely reached out to help me.
Meditating on Jehovah’s qualities
—you want to imitate him.
You want to show the kindness that he
has shown toward you and toward others.
So in a foreign language, I feel
like there is a giant opportunity to do that.
I started to learn Punjabi,
and I never regretted it.
It changed my service to Jehovah.
There was a time period in my Bethel service
when I was really, really sick,
and it was a kind of sickness
where I didn’t know why it was happening.
No doctor could tell me why it was happening.
It affected my physical appearance,
and it seemed liked torment
throughout each and every day.
A lot of times, I would have rather
not been seen.
So serving in a foreign language now
when you’re one of the people
who is spiritually supposed
to be strengthening others,
but you’re going
through a hard time yourself,
was a massive challenge for me.
I think all of his friends
just really appreciated
the faith that he had to overcome that.
And even though it was
a very low point in his life,
he really hung on to Jehovah.
If I’m in this assignment and I’ve seen
that Jehovah has blessed me,
what would lead me to conclude
that he’s going to stop?
He couldn’t sleep; he just couldn’t continue
at Bethel either.
I had left Bethel.
But still, my health was decreasing,
and it was getting really bad.
And it was getting to the point that doctors
expressed concern
about maybe an organ failing
and things like that.
But they did not give me any way out.
I had no way out.
He kept making progress
even though there were certainly
some really difficult times for him.
I had to take a realistic approach
toward my new situation,
and I had to figure out, “OK, how
am I going to put Kingdom interests first
“while materially taking care of myself
“and hopefully figure out why I’m sick
and if I can do anything about it?”
In the end, he decided
to stick with the foreign language.
And something I really learned
from Shaquille is
that he really took the Scriptures
and made it personal.
He would read it as if he was the person
in the Scriptures,
and he would meditate on it,
and now he could see how,
even though he didn’t know the answers,
Jehovah would help him
through his difficult times.
So, what am I going to do?
I’m going to live up
to what I promised to Jehovah.
Today, he serves with his wife
in the Punjabi field.
He’s a loving shepherd, and he
even instructs Punjabi-language classes.
In Indonesia, people work very hard.
They seek stability through a secure job.
This can have a powerful influence
on the brothers and sisters
because they may feel
that they can’t expand their ministry.
When I met the Jatmikos,
they were working toward pioneer service.
When they started, I asked them,
“Would you like to be used
more fully by Jehovah?”
I was confused.
We felt that the pioneer service itself was
already a big accomplishment.
I encouraged them to think
about the School for Kingdom Evangelizers.
I had never imagined applying for SKE.
It was tempting.
I wanted to be used by Jehovah,
but
what would happen to us after graduation?
Where would we be assigned?
What would be our assignment?
We needed more faith,
so we prayed a lot about that.
Jehovah answered my prayers
through the brothers and sisters
in the congregation.
Mardha had a prestigious job.
She was even being offered many scholarships
so that she could pursue higher education
and further advance her career.
The brothers and sisters
never criticized Mardha’s work choice.
Rather, they showed us the joys
of serving Jehovah more fully.
When I was still deciding what to do,
some of them asked me
about my spiritual goals
and what I could see myself doing.
Thinking about such questions
convinced me to choose SKE.
They were invited to attend the school.
They had to leave their jobs, their house,
and the comforts of the place and city
where they lived.
They were assigned to a small congregation.
They had to pray even more
to ask Jehovah God
for guidance and direction.
Now they’re serving in the traveling work,
caring for a circuit.
We are fully convinced
that it was not due
to any greatness on our part
but because of Jehovah’s help.
If we want to be used by Jehovah
and if we want to serve him,
Jehovah can use us in many different ways.
Fiji is a beautiful place.
However, one thing that is common here
is poverty.
That is the situation Sister Bakata faces.
My husband was a hard worker.
While we were out in the water,
he cried out from the mangroves.
When I went and found him,
I knew that it was a stroke.
I had to take on both roles
as husband and wife.
I would farm; I would fish.
It was a difficult life.
One day, a sister was sick.
Even though Sister Bakata faced challenges,
if there was any washing or cleaning
needed for the sick sister,
she was happy to go and help with that too.
I think back to when a cyclone hit Kadavu
—Cyclone Keni.
I was scared by the damage
it did to our house.
Our outdoor kitchen was blown off.
When I heard about the things
that happened to the brothers,
I felt so sorry for them.
Their roofs were blown away,
and the walls had fallen down.
Just think about what Sister Bakata did.
She had 20 Fijian dollars.
That is the only money she had,
but she decided to give all of that
to the brothers.
I didn’t have any other way to help them.
Jehovah is “the God of love.”
Like it says at 1 John 4:8,
his main quality is love.
Because of that love,
I gave the money from the bottom of my heart.
I learned that even though we are poor,
we can still be generous
to assist our brothers.
The more I gave,
the more Jehovah gave back to me.
Till today,
we’ve always had what we’ve needed.
In Peru, like many places around the world,
our brothers and sisters need to work hard.
Benjamín and Doris have to make
good use of their resources
in order to provide for their family.
We want to give our children
a spiritual heritage.
We want them to be able to serve Jehovah
by watching how we are doing it.
We watch a lot of videos that help us.
We often remember the video
about Abilio and Ulla.
They also had three children.
They moved to another place and grew up
in a very nice, spiritual atmosphere.
They are serving Jehovah now as adults.
So we asked ourselves,
‘Could we move to another place
where the need is greater?’
It takes faith to go to an unfamiliar place.
One video on jw.org that helped us a lot
was about the family from England
who moved to Ecuador.
First, they went for one month.
So we said
that we should also go visit first.
Going to another country
would have been exciting
and would have been super,
but our economic situation
wouldn’t allow us to go that far.
We took a trip together with our children
to visit a territory that had a need
called Calango.
It takes about an hour and a half
to get there.
They liked the geography of the area
and all the vegetation.
There were many things
that captured their attention.
The things that I like in Calango
are playing and preaching.
We were unable to move to the city of Calango
because of the economic situation
that the people face there.
It’s hard to get a job there.
So for that reason,
we decided to travel to Calango
on Fridays, Saturdays, and Sundays
and work the other days here in Pachacamác.
We have felt that Jehovah is helping us
because he has made it possible to work here.
And the money that we earn in those days
allows us to be with our brothers there.
We needed to know how to keep things simple.
We learned that from the videos on jw.org.
The hard work that they do proves to me
that they really love Jehovah.
They fully trust that Jehovah is our Father.
He is the Dad.
And we know that Dad
always comes through for his children.
And that faith is something
that greatly motivates them.
The videos on jw.org had given us
the push that we needed.
We needed those videos
in order to take action
and move to another area.
Across Russia,
our brothers have successfully faced decades
of persecution and ban.
The Budenchuks, like so many families there,
still face these challenges today.
On June 12, 2018,
at 5:30 a.m.,
armed men burst into our home.
They threw my husband to the floor
and handcuffed him.
Eventually, they sent my husband
to a pretrial detention facility
for 11 months.
It was frightening
just imagining certain things.
She didn’t find it easy and shed many tears.
I was really worried
about how I would care for the children
and how I would fulfill
their needs spiritually,
emotionally, and physically.
Prayer calmed me down
because I wanted, of course,
to react very emotionally
to everything
—to the injustice that we were facing.
When the court hearings were going on,
brothers and sisters would come.
It was such a support
—so strengthening!
On September 19, 2019,
the court convicted my husband
and sent him to a prison colony
for three and a half years.
In January 2020,
a new disaster hit us.
At 1:00 a.m., our house burned to the ground.
We stood there near the house,
and my son, Yegor, suggested saying a prayer.
I don’t remember the prayer,
but afterward I felt calmer.
Then cars started coming to the house.
It was our brothers and sisters.
I was frozen, shaking from the cold,
and they dressed me like a small child.
They brought us hot tea, food
—everything of the highest quality.
Just one month after the fire,
when they took my husband
to the prison colony,
officers there beat him up.
When I found out about it,
it was so hard for me
because I didn’t know how to help my husband
or how he was feeling.
Tanya copes with hardships very courageously.
I prayed to Jehovah, sometimes all night.
It felt as though Jehovah gave me
painkillers to dull my pain.
My husband, Aleksey,
tries to take care of us.
In the pretrial detention facility,
for example,
each day he wrote
letters of encouragement to us,
which we read together as a family.
My dear family: Remember the qualities
that we need right now
—endurance, courage, calmness
and, most important, faith.
I like the thought that after winter,
summer always comes;
after the night, the day arrives;
and after the darkest days,
there will definitely come a sunny one.
Throughout all these trials,
having a good spiritual schedule
and reading the Bible
has given me strength.
Also, we prepare for meetings
and participate in the ministry.
I was really afraid to do it,
but this situation has helped me
to see Jehovah’s support.
I have realized
that even in my circumstances,
I can still help others.
We know that Jehovah
has already given us his support,
and we believe
that he will continue to support us.
Their example of courage
and steadfast faith
in the face of difficulties and trials
proves that we can also remain faithful.
We too can make Jehovah happy
and continue to serve him
without becoming discouraged.
We have learned to trust more in Jehovah
and not to panic
when a difficult situation arises.
These difficulties have made me stronger,
helped me to overcome
many of the fears I used to have,
and strengthened my faith
and my desire to help others.
As we have seen,
our brothers the world over
continue to show strong faith.
How did they do it?
A regular study of God’s Word,
time spent in deep meditation,
and seeking His direction in prayer.
What did this allow them to accomplish?
Through faith, our brothers handled
theocratic building assignments;
learned foreign languages;
attended theocratic schools;
though poor, remained generous;
served where the need was greater;
and preached despite persecution.
And Jehovah knows we can do the same.
Yes, if we let faith move us to action,
those actions will strengthen our faith.